---
title: "Add Series Taxonomy to Hugo-Based Website"
date: 2020-10-06T07:00:02-04:00
draft: false

categories: [Blog, How-to]
tags: [Hugo, Taxonomy, Series]
toc: false
author: "Igor Baiborodine"
---

In this post, I continue extending my website's capabilities by adding new functionality, namely the series taxonomy. It's based on Hugo's built-in support of user-defined groupings of content. This article is the sixth part of the [series "Building Your Blog, the Geeky Way"](https://www.kiroule.com/article/building-your-blog-the-geeky-way/).

<!--more-->

As per [Hugo's documentation](https://gohugo.io/content-management/taxonomies), a taxonomy defined as follows:
> a categorization that can be used to classify content

Hugo provides native support for taxonomies, including two default ones: `tags` and `categories`. That means that no matter what theme you choose for your website, tag and category taxonomies will be automatically generated by Hugo.

Taxonomy is structurally defined using terms and values where the `term` is a key within the taxonomy, and the `value` is a piece of content assigned to a term. Using the `tags` taxonomy as an example, content relationships can be displayed as follows:

    Taxonomy  "Tag"
    Term        "Hugo"
    Value         "Start Blogging With Hugo, GitHub and Netlify"
    Value         "Add Favicon to Hugo-Based Website"
    Value         "Manage Environment-Specific Settings for Hugo-Based Website"

The example above presents content relationships from the taxonomy's perspective. Here is how it looks from the perspective of the content:

    Value     "Start Blogging With Hugo, GitHub and Netlify"
    Taxonomy    "Tags"
    Term          "Hugo"
    Term          "GitHub"
    Term          "Netlify"

Usually, when you publish a series of articles, it's a good practice to add `Next` and `Previous` links at the end of an article that is part of the series. Instead, I opted for listing all articles in the series. Therefore, every time a new post in the series is published, I have to manually add a link to the newly published article in every previously published series' article.

One solution to this problem might be to create a shortcode to encapsulate such a list of article links. With this approach, you add this shortcode to the end of each series' article, and when a new article is published, you only need to update the shortcode. So every time you start a new series, you have to create its proper shortcode.

But it is possible to parameterize such a shortcode by passing the series name as an argument. In this case, the content should be somehow classified so that we can retrieve the corresponding articles. To help us group such content, we can implement the series taxonomy.

Now let's take a closer look at the implementation details.
{{< toc >}}

### Configuration
Before using the `series` taxonomy, it should be defined in the site config file by providing singular and plural labels:
```toml
[taxonomies]
  tag = "tags"
  category = "categories"
  series = "series"
```
Please note that if you want to continue using `tags` and `categories` default taxonomies, you should explicitly define in the config file.  

### Taxonomy template
The `layouts/_default/series.terms.html` file is the `series` taxonomy template. Hugo will use it to automatically generate both a page that lists all of the series and individual pages that list the content associated with each series. This template is implemented as follows:
```html
{{ define "main" }}

<div class="content">
    <div class="article-wrapper u-cf single">
        <a class="bubble" href="{{ "/series/" | relLangURL }}">
            <i class="fa fa-fw fa-list-alt"></i>
        </a>

        <article class="article">
            <div class="content">
                <h3>{{ i18n "series" | default "series" }}</h3>
                <hr>
                <ul id="all-series">
                    {{ range $name, $taxonomy := .Site.Taxonomies.series }}
                        {{ $series_name := $name }}
                        {{ $series_path := (printf "/series/%s" (urlize $name)) }}
                        {{ $series_page := site.GetPage $series_path }}

                        {{ if $series_page }}
                            {{ $series_name = $series_page.Title }}
                        {{ end }}

                        <li><a href="{{ $series_path }}">{{ $series_name }} ({{ $taxonomy.Count }})</a></li>
                    {{ end }}
                </ul>
            </div>
        </article>
    </div>
</div>
{{ end }}
```

### Shortcode
The `layouts/shortcodes/series.html` file is the shortcode that encapsulates the list of articles for the provided series name. Articles are sorted descending by page's `date` front matter variable value, i.e., the newest first. This shortcode is implemented as follows:
```html
{{ $series_name := .Get 0 | urlize }}

{{ range $key, $taxonomy := .Site.Taxonomies.series }}
    {{ if eq $key $series_name }}
    <ul>
        {{ range $taxonomy.Pages.ByDate }}
        <li hugo-nav="{{ .RelPermalink }}"><a href="{{ .Permalink }}">{{ .LinkTitle }}</a></li>
        {{ end }}
    </ul>
    {{ end }}
{{ end }}
```

### i18n
The `i18n` function is used in the `layouts/_default/series.terms.html` taxonomy to display the `Series` label. Therefore, in the language of your choice, define a label value for the `series` key in the corresponding i18n configuration file, e.g., `en.toml`:
```toml
[series]
other = "Series"
```

### Usage
To group articles as a series, add the `series` front matter variable to each article and set its value to the name of the series, for example:
```
series: "Building Your Blog, the Geeky Way"
```
Then if you want to list all articles for a particular series within the markdown, use the `series` shortcode with the series' name, for example:
```
{{</* series "Building Your Blog, the Geeky Way" */>}}
```
<-- image -->

The page that lists all the series will be available at `<site-base-url>/series/`, for instance, `https://www.kiroule.com/series/`:
<-- image -->

And the content associated with the series "Building Your Blog, the Geeky Way" can be accessed at `<site-base-url>/series/<urilzed-series-name>`, for example, `https://www.kiroule.com/series/building-your-blog-the-geeky-way/`.

The implementation above can be applied not only to your Hugo-based website but directly to the Hugo theme of your choice. [Here](https://github.com/Lednerb/bilberry-hugo-theme/commit/553a452c745bf19f82e1a267b5bf51da0ae3bc7e
) you can check my contribution to the Bilberry Hugo theme.
